add instructions to configure env_vars (#8071)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/configure-dbt-extension.md

---
title: "Configure the dbt VS Code extension"
sidebar_label: "Configure dbt extension"
id: "configure-dbt-extension"
description: "Prepare your local environment (files, env vars, connectivity) so the VS Code extension and terminal both work smoothly."
---

This page explains how to configure local setup for the dbt VS Code extension and configure environment variables, if your project uses them. The steps differ slightly depending on whether you use <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> or <Constant name="core" />.

- <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> &mdash; You’ll mirror your <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> environment locally to unlock <Constant name="fusion" />-powered features like <Constant name="mesh" />, deferral, and so on.
- <Constant name="core" /> &mdash; You’ll confirm that your existing local setup and environment variables work seamlessly with the <Constant name="fusion_engine" /> and VS Code extension.

## Prepare your local environment

> 

Reviewer: > If you haven't yet set up your local environment, follow the steps in the [later section](#set-environment-variables-locally).  

this is confusing, it makes it seem like i should skip ahead to set-environment-variables-locally, but i think i should read the following section?

> This section explains how to prepare your local environment to mirror your dbt project environment. If you already have your local environment set up, you don't need to do anything here. If you haven't yet set up your local environment, follow the steps in the [later section](#set-environment-variables-locally). 

Author: oh yes sorry! making changes here
```suggestion
This section explains how to prepare your local environment to mirror your dbt project environment. If you already have your local environment set up, you don't need to do anything here. 
```

2. Ensure you have a dbt [`profiles.yml` file](/docs/core/connect-data-platform/profiles.yml). This file defines your data warehouse connection. If you don't have one, you'll go through the dbt configuration processes to set it up. 
3. Once you've set this up or checked it, validate it by running `dbt debug`.
4. Add a `dbt_cloud.yml` file by going to the <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> project:
   - **Your profile** -> **VS Code Extension** -> **Download credentials**. 
   - Download the `dbt_cloud.yml` file with your [**Personal access Token (PAT)**](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/user-tokens) included. This then connects the extension to <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> and enables platform features such as <Constant name="mesh" /> and deferral.
   - Check the `project_id` in your `dbt_project.yml` file matching the project you're working on.
5. Confirm connection from your workstation. Your local computer connects directly to your data warehouse and Git.  
   - <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> users: Ensure your laptop/VPN is allowed; <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> IPs no longer apply. Check with your admin if you have any issues.

>    - <Constant name="core" /> users: This has likely already been configured.

Reviewer: self-hosted dbt?

---

> title: "Configure the dbt VS Code extension"

Reviewer 2: This page seems more about the environment variables and the path to get them set up rather than the full range of dbt VS Code settings available. If we're not going to cover the other settings, I suggest we retitle this to be more specific

Author: retitled to: "Configure your local setup"

sidebar_label: "Configure dbt extension"
id: "configure-dbt-extension"

> description: "Prepare your local environment (files, env vars, connectivity) so the VS Code extension and terminal both work smoothly."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: "Optimize your VS Code extension environment (files, env vars, connectivity)."
```

---

> 

Reviewer 2: We should add a "Prerequisites" section at the top that calls out:
- Fusion installed
- VS Code or Cursor 
- Basic understanding of Git workflows and dbt project structure (since we're starting with instructions on how to clone a repo)
- Developer or analyst license for cloud functions

> Whether you currently use <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> or self-hosted <Constant name="core" />, use this page to configure local setup for the dbt VS Code extension and configure environment variables, if your project uses them. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Whether you currently use <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> or self-hosted <Constant name="fusion" />, follow the instructions on this page to configure the dbt VS Code extension and environment variables. 
```

Author: we should include all self hosted users so will update this to 'self hosting'. most users that develop locally probably already have this set up but i still think we should include this just in case.

Author: `
Whether you currently use <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> or self-host with <Constant name="fusion" />, or you’re a <Constant name="core" /> user adopting <Constant name="fusion" />, follow the instructions on this page to configure your local setup for the dbt VS Code extension and set environment variables if your project uses them.`

If you're new to dbt or getting started with a new project, you can skip this page and check out our [Quickstart for the <Constant name="fusion_engine"/>](/guides/fusion?step=1) to get started with the dbt extension.

> The steps differ slightly depending on whether you use <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> or <Constant name="core" />.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The steps differ slightly depending on whether you use <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> or <Constant name="fusion" />.
```

Author: thanks Matt! updated to:
`The steps differ slightly depending on whether you use <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> or self host with <Constant name="fusion" />.`

> - <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> &mdash; You’ll mirror your <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> environment locally to unlock <Constant name="fusion" />-powered features like <Constant name="mesh" />, deferral, and so on. You'll also set up environment variables to leverage the VS Code extension's features.

Reviewer 2: A lot of the language on this page indicates that they won't be able to use the VS Code features if they don't configure environment variables. Can we be extra clear that this is only needed if they fall into a specific scenario?

Author: updated:

`- <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> &mdash; You’ll mirror your <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> environment locally to unlock <Constant name="fusion" />-powered features like <Constant name="mesh" />, deferral, and so on. If your project has environment variables, you'll also set them locally to leverage the VS Code extension's features.`

> - <Constant name="core" /> &mdash; You’ll confirm that your existing local setup and environment variables work seamlessly with the <Constant name="fusion_engine" /> and VS Code extension.

Reviewer 2: This page keeps mentioning "Core" but the VSCE requires Fusion. From this language, it looks like we're talking about preparing Core installations for the Fusion upgrade. If that's the case, we should call that out (upgrading to Fusion) explicitly

Author: updated here: 

`Whether you currently use <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> or self-host with <Constant name="fusion" />, or you’re a <Constant name="core" /> user upgrading to <Constant name="fusion" />, follow the instructions on this page to configure your local setup for the dbt VS Code extension and set environment variables if your project uses them.`

Author: `- Self-hosted &mdash; When you self-host with <Constant name="fusion" /> or are upgrading from <Constant name="core" /> to <Constant name="fusion" />, you’ll most likely already have a local setup and environment variables. Use this page to confirm that your existing local setup and environment variables work seamlessly with the <Constant name="fusion_engine" /> and VS Code extension.`

## Prepare your local environment

> This section explains how to prepare your local environment to mirror your dbt project environment. If you already have your local environment set up, you don't need to do anything here. 

Reviewer 2: It feels like we're using "environment" in two different ways here (local dbt installation vs. cloud staging/prod/development environments), which may be a little confusing. Maybe we could substitute "local environment" with "self-hosted dbt" or something similar
```suggestion
The following instructions show how to configure your self-hosted dbt project to mirror your <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> project environment. If you already have your local environment set up, you don't need to do anything here.  
```

> If you're a <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> user new to the extension or VS Code/Cursor, you'll need to set up your local environment to mirror your <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> environment and follow these steps.

Reviewer 2: This section basically restates the above
```suggestion
```

> 1. [Clone](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/sourcecontrol/overview#_cloning-a-repository) your dbt project locally by cloning your <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> repo (from your Git provider).  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. [Clone](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/sourcecontrol/overview#_cloning-a-repository) your dbt project  <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> repo (from your Git provider).  
```

Author: addressed:

`[Clone](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/sourcecontrol/overview#_cloning-a-repository)
 your dbt project repository from your Git provider to your local machine. If you use <Constant name="dbt_platform" />, clone the same repo connected to your project.`

Author: i do think we need to specify locally here

> 2. Ensure you have a dbt [`profiles.yml` file](/docs/core/connect-data-platform/profiles.yml). This file defines your data warehouse connection. If you don't have one, you'll go through the dbt configuration processes to set it up. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Ensure you have a dbt [`profiles.yml` file](/docs/core/connect-data-platform/profiles.yml). This file defines your data warehouse connection. If you don't have one, run `dbt init` in the terminal to configure your adapter. 
```

> 3. Once you've set this up or checked it, validate it by running `dbt debug`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Validate your `profiles.yml` and project configuration by running `dbt debug`.
```

> 4. Add a `dbt_cloud.yml` file by going to the <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> project:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Add a `dbt_cloud.yml` file from the <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> Account settings:
```

>    - **Your profile** -> **VS Code Extension** -> **Download credentials**. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - Navigate to **Your profile** -> **VS Code Extension** -> **Download credentials**. 
```

>    - Download the `dbt_cloud.yml` file with your [**Personal access Token (PAT)**](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/user-tokens) included. This then connects the extension to <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> and enables platform features such as <Constant name="mesh" /> and deferral.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - Download the `dbt_cloud.yml` file with your [**Personal access Token (PAT)**](/docs/dbt-cloud-apis/user-tokens) included and place it in the `~/.dbt/` directory. This then registers and connects the extension to <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> and enables platform features such as <Constant name="mesh" /> and deferral.
```

   - Check the `project_id` in your `dbt_project.yml` file matching the project you're working on.

> 5. Confirm connection from your workstation. Your local computer connects directly to your data warehouse and Git.  

Reviewer 2: This is sort of duplicative of the step where they run `dbt debug`. Maybe we could combine the two?

Author: this was requested since users are running into issues, but i'll add debug to make it clearer

   - <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> users: Ensure your laptop/VPN is allowed; <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> IPs no longer apply. Check with your admin if you have any issues.
   - <Constant name="core" /> users: This has likely already been configured.

> 6. (Optional) If your project uses environment variables, find your environment variables and [set them](#set-environment-variables-locally) in VS Code or Cursor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. (Optional) If your project uses environment variables, [set them](#set-environment-variables-locally) in VS Code or Cursor.
```

Author: updated to:
`6. (Optional) If your project uses environment variables, [find them](/docs/build/environment-variables#setting-and-overriding-environment-variables) in the <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> and [set them](#set-environment-variables-locally) in VS Code or Cursor.`

>    - <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> users: Copy any environment variables from **Deploy → Environments** **→ Environment variables** tab in <Constant name="dbt_platform" />.  Masked secrets will appear hidden, speak with your admin to get those values.  

Reviewer 2: Should we show a screenshot here?
```suggestion
   - <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> users: Copy any environment variables from **Deploy → Environments → Environment variables** tab in <Constant name="dbt_platform" />.  Masked secrets are hidden.  Work with your admin to get those values.  
```

Author: added!

>    - <Constant name="core" /> users: You'll most likely have defined your own [`env_var()` references](/reference/dbt-jinja-functions/env_var)  locally if your project uses them.

Reviewer 2: Are we saying they'll already have this defined or they'll need to define it?

Author: they most likely will have this defined! have removed it since i added a sentence about this earlier in line 26

## Set environment variables locally

> The extension and CLI uses environment variables for authentication and configuration. The following table shows the different options and when to use them:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The extension and CLI use environment variables for authentication and configuration. The following table shows the different options and when to use them:
```

| Location | Affects | Session state | When to use |
|-----------|----------|-----------|-----------|
| [**Shell profile** ](#configure-at-the-os--shell-level)| Terminal  | ✅ Permanent | Variables remain active globally and available across terminal sessions.|
| [**VS Code/Cursor settings**](#configure-in-the-vs-code-extension-settings) | Extension menus + <Term id="lsp" /> | ✅ Per VS Code/Cursor profile | Editor-only workflows using the extension menu actions. |

> | [**One terminal session**](#configure-in-the-terminal-session)  | Current terminal only | ❌ Temporary | One off quick testing. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| [**Terminal session**](#configure-in-the-terminal-session)  | Current terminal only | ❌ Temporary | One off testing. |
```

:::tip 

> If you want to use both the VS Code extension menus and terminal to run dbt commands, define your variables in both the `shell` profile so they remain active globally and in VS Code/Cursor settings if you use extension menu actions.

Reviewer 2: Looks like we're missing a second option?
"...in both the `shell` profile" and where else?

Author: this is a mistake, we only want to sugg .env / vs code settings and shell.

:::

> #### Configure at the OS / shell level

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Configure at the OS or shell level
```

> Define variables once at the OS or shell level to ensure they're available to all terminals. Even if you close a terminal window, the variables will remain available to you.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Define variables once at the OS or shell level to ensure they're available to all terminal sessions. Even if you close a terminal window, the variables will remain available to you.
```

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="mac-linux" label="Mac / Linux">

> 1. Open your shell configuration file in a text editor using the following commands: (If the file does not exist, create it using a text editor using `vi ~/.zshrc` or `vi ~/.bashrc`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Open your shell configuration file in a text editor using the following commands (If the file does not exist, create it using a text editor using `vi ~/.zshrc` or `vi ~/.bashrc`):
```

    ```bash
    open -e ~/.zshrc ## for zsh (macOS)
    nano ~/.bashrc ## for bash (Linux or older macOS)
   ```
2. A file will open up and you can add your environment variables to the file. For example:
      - For zsh (macOS):
        ```bash
            ## ~/.zshrc 
            export DBT_ENV_VAR1="my_value"
            export DBT_ENV_VAR2="another_value"
        ```
      - For bash (Linux or older macOS):
        ```bash
            ## ~/.bashrc or ~/.bash_profile
            export DBT_ENV_VAR1="my_value"
            export DBT_ENV_VAR2="another_value"
        ```
3. Save the file.  
4. Start a new shell session by closing and reopening the terminal or running `source ~/.zshrc` or `source ~/.bashrc` in the terminal.

> 5. Then verify the variables by running `echo $DBT_ENV_VAR1` and `echo $DBT_ENV_VAR2` in the terminal.<br />

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Verify the variables by running `echo $DBT_ENV_VAR1` and `echo $DBT_ENV_VAR2` in the terminal.<br />
```

If you see the value printed back in the terminal, you're all set! These variables will now be available:
- In all future terminal sessions
- For all dbt commands run in the terminal

</TabItem>

> <TabItem value="windows-cmd" label="Windows Cmd">

Reviewer 2: Windows command (cmd) and Windows powershell are separate programs. Looks like we're only calling out Powershell
```suggestion
<TabItem value="windows" label="Windows">
```

> There are two main ways to create persistent environment variables on Windows: through PowerShell or the Environment Variables UI. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are two ways to create persistent environment variables on Windows: through PowerShell or the System Properties. 
```

The following steps will explain how to configure environment variables using PowerShell.

**PowerShell**
1. Run the following commands in PowerShell:
  ```powershell
    [Environment]::SetEnvironmentVariable("DBT_ENV_VAR1","my_value","User")
    [Environment]::SetEnvironmentVariable("DBT_ENV_VAR2","another_value","User")
    ```

> 1. This saves the variables permanently for your user account. (To make them available system-wide for all users, replace "User" with "Machine" (requires admin rights)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. This saves the variables permanently for your user account. To make them available system-wide for all users, replace "User" with "Machine" (requires admin rights).
```

2. Then, restart VS Code or select **Developer: Reload Window** for changes to take effect.
3. Verify the changes by running `echo $DBT_ENV_VAR1` and `echo $DBT_ENV_VAR2` in the terminal.

> **GUI (Environment Variables)**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**System properties (Environment Variables)**
```

1. Press **Start** → search for **Environment Variables** → open **Edit the system environment variables**. 

> 2. Click **Environment Variables…**.

Reviewer 2: Just in case for some reason their window opens to a different tab
```suggestion
2. From the **Advanced** tab of the System Properties, click **Environment Variables…**.
```

3. Under **User variables**, click **New…**.
4. Add the variables and values. For example:
    - Variable name: `DBT_ENV_VAR1`
    - Variable value: `my_value`
5. Repeat for any others, then click **OK**.
6. Restart VS Code or Cursor.
7. Verify the changes by running `echo $DBT_ENV_VAR1` and `echo $DBT_ENV_VAR2` in the terminal.
</TabItem>
</Tabs>

#### Configure in the VS Code extension settings

> To use the dbt extension menu actions/buttons, you can configure environment variables directly in the [User Settings](vscode://settings/dbt.environmentVariables) interface or in any `.env` file at the root level.

Reviewer 2: Just so it's clear that this link is opening a window in their program and not linking to a doc
```suggestion
To use the dbt extension menu actions/buttons, you can configure environment variables directly in the [VS Code User Settings](vscode://settings/dbt.environmentVariables) interface or in any `.env` file at the root level.
```

- Configuring in the User Settings works with the dbt extension buttons and menus (for LSP, "Show build menu," and so on).
- Not inherited by the VS Code terminal or external shells.
- Running a dbt command in the terminal won't fetch or use these variables.

To configure environment variables in VS Code/Cursor:

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="user-settings" label="Open User Settings">
1. Open the [Command Palette](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/configure/settings#_user-settings) (Cmd + Shift + P for Mac, Ctrl + Shift + P for Windows/Linux).
2. Then select either **Preferences: Open User Settings** in the dropdown menu. 

> 3. Open the [VS Code user settings page](vscode://settings/dbt.environmentVariables).

Reviewer 2: Can we do this for Cursor as well since these instructions state they're for both

Author: yes! tested

4. Search for `dbt.environmentVariables`.
5. In the **dbt:Environment Variables** section, add your item and value for the environment variables.
6. Click **Ok** to save the changes.

> 7. Reload the VS Code extension to apply the changes.

Reviewer 2: On these lines where we state they should reload the extension, if might be helpful to point out how to do so quickly

5. Confirm connection from your workstation (like running `dbt debug` in the terminal). Your local computer connects directly to your data warehouse and Git.  
   - <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> users: Ensure your laptop/VPN is allowed; <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> IPs no longer apply. Check with your admin if you have any issues.
   - <Constant name="core" /> users: This has likely already been configured.
6. (Optional) If your project uses environment variables, [find them](/docs/build/environment-variables#setting-and-overriding-environment-variables) in the <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> and [set them](#set-environment-variables-locally) in VS Code or Cursor.
   - <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> users: Copy any environment variables from **Deploy → Environments → Environment variables** tab in <Constant name="dbt_platform" />.  Masked secrets are hidden.  Work with your admin to get those values.  
    <Lightbox src="/img/docs/dbt-cloud/using-dbt-cloud/Environment Variables/navigate-to-env-vars.png" title="Environment variables tab"/>

## Set environment variables locally

> The extension and CLI use environment variables for authentication and configuration. The following table shows the different options and when to use them:

Reviewer 2: I think we should still add some language here that explains when they will need to do this. If a user has never touched environment variables or cloud account before (using only Fusion CLI locally), a lot of this language makes it seem like they'll have to set them up to use the basic functionality of the VSCE

Author: addressed: https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/8071/commits/a0b917b3c45408abcaf18da8666e7d20d2b3b38c

> The extension and CLI use environment variables for authentication and configuration. The following table shows the different options and when to use them:

Author: ```suggestion
Environment variables are used for authentication and configuration.

This section is most relevant for [dbt VS Code extension](/docs/about-dbt-extension) and <Constant name="dbt_platform"/> users who have environment variables configured as part of their workspace setup. If you’re using <Constant name="fusion"/> locally, you can also install the VS Code extension and use its features and actions &mdash; you just may not need to configure these variables unless your setup specifically requires them.

The following table shows the different options and when to use them:
```
